the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
all right so someone want to explain why
this is the correct answer and we have a
syringe highlighter you probably never
had something like this before okay so
the fifth like the fourth excited state
is N equals five and then I is opposite
of the negative number shown so right so
ie is always going to be positive and
you have to pay attention to what N
equals when you're in the excited state
okay so we've been talking about the
hydrogen atom and binding energies what
comes out of the Schrodinger equation we
have the binding energies that come out
and we also have wave functions so today
we're going to be talking about wave
functions which are often referred to as
orbitals in chemistry for the hydrogen
atom so when you solve the Schrodinger
equation you get out this information
about wave functions and what comes out
of it is these quantum numbers and we
already saw quantum number n coming out
but there are three quantum numbers that
are going to come out of the Schrodinger
equation and those three quantum numbers
are necessary to describe the wave
function or the orbital so we have n the
principal quantum number we've already
talked about that and we've already seen
that n is an integer so I'll just put
that down here so n can equal one two
three on two affinity so this describes
the energy level or the shell then we
have L which we haven't talked about yet
so that's the angular momentum quantum
number so it tells you about the angular
momentum it also tells you about the sub
shell or the shape of the orbital
and so L is related to n and it can be 0
1 2 3 onward to n minus 1 so it's
biggest number is n minus 1 then we have
M the magnetic quantum number and we
often see this also listed as M sub L
because M is related back to L and this
is equal to minus L dot dot dot to 0 dot
dot dot to plus now and M describes the
behavior and a magnetic field it also
describes the orientation of the orbital
respect to with respect to an axes and
it tells you about the specific orbital
in question so we need all three of
these to describe any orbital all right
so let's look at this in a slightly
other way so our we're going to have
lots of different sort of nomenclatures
for the same thing so to describe an
orbital we need those three quantum
numbers we need n L and M and this can
also be expressed as our wave function
sub n L M and again we talked about this
last time we're going to talk more about
it so our wave function is also
described by are the radius and theta
and Phi which are two angles and we're
going to talk about a lot about those
today so the wave function for the
ground state is abbreviated wave
function sub-100
because it's the ground state so N
equals one and L and M are zero so what
you see down here the 1 0 0 refers back
to what is n what is L
what is M and this also has another name
so in the terminology of chemists we
call the wave function 1 0 0 1 s or the
1 s orbital
so let's look again now at the same
things we just talked about but going
through kind of chemistry lingo so again
n describes the shell or the energy
level again it's integers 1 2 3 etc L in
chemistry lingo the sub shell or the
shape of the orbital and instead of
listing it this way we have another way
to list it if we're a chemist and that
is SP DF etc so chemists like numbers
but we also throw in some letters every
once in a while and then M again
designates this orbital orientation or
the specific orbital so for s there's
only s it doesn't have any any any other
designation as we'll talk more about
later but for P we start having sub
orbitals and there's a difference in
terms of the orientation of this so we
have px py PZ so that's what M tells us
about so it if we have all three of
these numbers we get down to the
specific orbital we can say oh that's PZ
for example so we need all of these
three numbers to define the orbital and
this is in and the chemistry lingo all
right also a little bit more chemistry
lingo so here we have l equals 0 so that
is the S orbital when l equals 1 that's
the p orbital l equals 2 is the D
orbital
and L equals three is the F orbital and
frankly we don't really go much beyond
that and in this part of the course
we're really only going to be talking
mostly about s and P orbitals we get to
D orbitals around Thanksgiving time so
you can look forward to that and pretty
much we're not going to really talk
about F orbitals very much at all you'll
need to know some things about them but
we're not going to go into them in any
kind of detail all right so if we keep
going then we can think about l equals
one or our P orbitals and then when l
equals one then M can equal zero plus
one or minus one and when M equals zero
that's by definition the PZ orbital so
when you see M equals zero that's going
to be PZ and when M is plus one or minus
one those are the px or the P Y orbitals
and this is just something that you need
to remember that Z is the one that's
special it's the one that has M equals
zero all right so we can take all of
these nomenclatures now and use it to
fill in this awesome table so this will
help you kind of keep track of all the
different ways you can designate the
same things and we'll fill this in so
first state label what do I mean by this
by this I mean this 1 0 0 to generate
this wave function of where we have this
1 0 0 listed below the wave function
here and so now this is just a little
color coding but it's a blank in your
handout so N equals 1 so n is first L is
the second number and M is the third
here so 1 0 0 and what kind of orbital
is this can just yell it out yeah so
that's the 1s orbital and so the 1 N
equals 1 that's
one s and now we have our binding
energies again and so we can write those
in two different ways
so we saw for the hydrogen atom before
it comes out of the Schrodinger equation
that the binding energy of the electron
for the nucleus is - the read Burke's
constant RH divided by N squared and
here and is one so divided by one
squared so this is just the value for
the read burg constant the negative
value in binding energies again are
always negative so we have our first one
down so now for the second what number
am I going to write here for the state
label you can just yell it out yeah two
hundred or two zero zero and then you
would put it this way where the state
label is by the wavefunction
what orbital is this 2s and then we also
know the binding energies for this so
here we have minus RH over N squared
where n is 2 2 squared and we saw this
number last time so we can keep going
now we have 2 1 1 so we can write that
down we can write it both ways what
orbital is this so it's a 2p and because
M is plus 1 and not 0 it's either X or Y
do we have a different or the same
binding energy here we have the same
right it's just over N squared we're
still talking about N equals 2 so 2
squared so it's the same value here now
we have M equals 0 so we write 2 1 0 and
now what is that orbital
2pz right because that's ME cuisine I
gave you so we know that one for sure
and again the energies are going to be
the same and then the last one so now we
write - 1 - 1 and now it's again a 2p
orbital and it's either Y or X and the
energies are going to be the same so
these are just a table that kind of
inter converts different ways that you
will see things written and you'll know
if you see it one way
what orbital to put down and we can also
think about the binding energies for
those particular orbitals or for
electrons in those particular orbitals
all right so why don't why don't you try
a clicker question on this
ten seconds
excellent right so you're getting the
hang of this it's great some things it's
always nice when there's some things
that are pretty straightforward so N
equals 5 l equals 1 which means p
orbital and M equals 0 which means PZ
okay so let's think now about these
orbitals again and we looked at that
table and saw that if we're talking
about N equals 2 they all seem to have
the same energy so for a hydrogen atom
and it'll get more complicated when we
start talking about things with more
than one electron but for a hydrogen
atom orbitals have this that have the
same end value have the same energy so
here we have N equals 1 l equals 0 this
is our 1s we have N equals 2 R 2 s and
our 2p orbitals
N equals 3 we have our 3s 3p and 3d and
in this case these all all these
orbitals are what's known as degenerate
front with respect to each other they
have the same energy and so for any n
with a hydrogen atom or any one electron
system for n shells there are N squared
degenerate or for any N or N squared
degenerate orbitals so they're all going
to be the same energy and that changes
when we go to more complicated systems
for but for hydrogen this holds ok so
now I'm going to tell you why you should
care a little about these energy levels
again and today you're going to hear in
your own in their own words from a
graduate student in the physical
chemistry division
in the chemistry department here at MIT
and the work that I've been focusing on
for the last couple of years involves
nanoscale magnetic resonance imaging or
nano MRI when you think of like typical
MRI what comes to mind for most people
is through the image of what a brain
scan or a heart scan or some sort of
organ scan inside the human body the way
that MRI works now the way that you take
a picture of anything in your body is
you use water and the reason that you
use water is because it's made up of
hydrogen atoms and oxygen atoms and
hydrogen atoms actually generate a
magnetic signal and so you can take a
picture of that
the idea behind nano MRI is is that you
want to you want to take a picture you
want to do the same kind of imaging but
on a considerably smaller scale we have
this probe which is sensitive to local
magnetic fields and the way that the
probe works is that you have these
electrons there's a ground state for
these electrons and two excited States
for these electrons which are actually
degenerate with each other and
degenerative means that they just have
the exact same energy level as you move
the probe around anything that's in the
environment that generates a magnetic
field will change what the energy levels
of these two excited States is so when
you're far away there's no change in
they're exactly the same and as you get
closer and closer these levels start to
split and what we actually care about is
what is the splitting between these two
levels because that's what tells us what
the magnetic field is in traditional MRI
the probe that we use the thing that
measures the fields itself is very very
big it's person-sized the probe that
we're using in this nano MRI is
nanometer sized so this gives us the
ability to look at things that are on
the nanometer scale and to give you a
sense of size that's like one ten
thousandth the width of a human hair so
that includes viruses cells parts of
proteins not just the entire protein and
on top of that we'll be able to look
within objects so you're not just
sensitive to what's on the surface you
can actually see how are things
what's the constitution what's the
makeup of things within the object that
you want to image so the long-term goal
the one thing that I would really love
to see this this technology be able to
do is say okay we've got this virus
let's
see how it works let's let's watch it in
real time let's see if we can see how it
attaches to cells and you know invades
them and in ultimate ly kills them okay
so I always think this is a great time
of year to show this video because
pretty much viruses I think start to be
on people's minds everyone has sinuses
and colds and other things going on and
so understanding you know we're still
very far away from having a real cure
for the common cold
so I think it's a very very timely to be
talking about talking about this
research I'll also use this to remind
myself to tell you that if you qualify
for extra time on the exam you should
get me your form for the exam and it
reminded me of to say that because Ben
who is a former TA for this class always
Proctor's the extra time folks so you'll
get to meet him in real life if you
qualify for for extra time on exams okay
so hydrogen is in fact important I'm
excited to get on to elements that have
more than one electron but hydrogen
actually does turn out to be extremely
important a lot of imaging as you heard
from Ben is based on hydrogen so we're
spending a lot of time on hydrogen but
hydrogen really really is an important
element okay so continuing on now what
is the significance of this wave
function what why do why do we care
about about this and so really we're
interested in trying to understand not
just how tightly the electron is bound
to the nucleus but kind of how the
electrons exist around the nucleus and
so the wave function really gets at this
it gets at the probability density the
likelihood that you'll find an electron
at a certain location the probability
per unit volume and again this is a
three-dimensional problem so our wave
function depends on our radius R but it
also did
on two angles the theta and Phi and so
you can kind of think of those as
latitude and longitude if you will and
so we want to know what the probability
is that an electron will be at a certain
R theta and Phi position in a particular
small unit volume in that area how how
well can we understand where the
electron is and this gives rise to a lot
of the properties of the elements so
probability density density per unit
volume so really when we're talking
about where electrons are we're thinking
about a shape of an orbital a shape of a
probability density of where that
electron might be so now we're going to
think about shapes so we can define a
wave function in terms of two properties
a radial wave function and an angular
wave function so again the wave function
has these three things we're considered
with the radius and these two angles so
we can rewrite this breaking up these
two different components the radial
component that depends on the radius so
that's easy to remember a radial radius
and the angular component that depends
on the angles so the nomenclature here
is pretty good all right so we have
these two components so now I'm gonna
show you a table that is largely from
your book don't let it scare you you do
not need to memorize any of these things
and I'm showing this to you because I
want you to believe me about certain
properties of these two functions so
here they are solved you can look them
up actually I think we just typed a new
copy of this so it was easier to see if
you find any typos please let me know
but there's a couple of important points
so on this side we have the radial wave
function and over here we have the
angular wave function for various values
of N and L so again not an exhaustive
list here and a lot of these are written
in terms of a 0 which is the Bohr radius
which is a constant
five point five 52.9 picometers all
right
so now let's just consider the ground
state so we'll start with that lowest
energy state or most stable state the 1s
orbital for the hydrogen atom so we have
our wave function 1 0 0 here and this is
1s up here again N equals 1 l equals 0
so that's 1 s and Z for hydrogen atom is
1 so I've gotten rid of all the Z's to
make it a little simpler so here we have
the radial wave function times the
angular wave function which is listed up
here and the thing that I really want
you to notice is that for all of the S
orbitals this is a constant so this is
always the angular component for all S
orbitals and in fact there are no
angular components in there so all 1s 2s
3s all have this same constant and that
leads to a very important property of S
orbitals which is that they're
spherically symmetrical there in other
words they're independent of those
angles of theta and Phi and so that
means that the probability of finding
the electron away from the nucleus is
just going to depend on R there's only R
in this equation the angles are not part
of the equation so s is spherically
symmetrical the probability of finding
the electron just depends on the radius
so we can draw a picture or multiple
pictures of what that could look like
and these are three common plots so I'll
tell you that on your handout the plots
are listed on one page and then the
plots are shown on the next page and I'm
going to kind of go back and forth
between things so the plots don't have
to write this down there on the other
page but if you want to pay attention to
which kind of plot goes with which plot
so these are three different ways
quote visualize and some people say can
you give me another visualization these
are really we're really just trying to
think about probabilities of finding
electrons here and so you you can't sort
of take a picture of an orbital so these
are just different ways to help people
think about that possible distribution
of electrons around the nucleus alright
so one thing that that everyone's
feeling pretty good about is that it
should be spherically symmetrical for an
S orbital and so we have a circle and so
the probability density which is shown
in this plot and the probability density
pots are basically just dots were the
more concentrated the dots are the
higher the probability density for that
particular the probability for that
particular volume exist so in here
there's sort of more dots and then less
thoughts as you come out and so that is
a circle which is what it's symmetrical
so that's the you can always recognize
the 1s you have this symmetrical thing
so this is the wave function squared is
this probability density plot another
kind of plot that you can see looks at
the radial wave function plotted against
the distance are here distance from the
nucleus and then a third kind of plot is
another probability plot like this one
up here but instead of the dots
indicating the higher probability
density you have a radial probability
distribution and so at the nucleus at 0
it will then the probability goes up the
electron is not going to crash into the
nucleus so it won't be right on top of
the nucleus but as you get out a little
bit farther away there's a high
probability that it's there and then
that decreases again so the top one in
the bottom one both talked about the
probability of finding an electron in a
particular unit and I'll give you just a
little more definition of this and this
is on the same page above those
different plots so the radial district
just
fusion reports on the probability of
finding an electron in this spherical
shell at some little distance D R from
the origin and one thing that comes out
of this which is pretty important is the
most probable value for that distance R
which is denoted R M P so most probable
distance and for a hydrogen atom this is
a zero the Bohr radius
and you can see it expressed in
different units over here and from the
plot that will be the top part of the
plot the most probable distance in this
case that's the Bohr radius for the
hydrogen atom so we have now these three
different kinds of plots that you'll see
and I want to point out that there are
different plots sometimes if people are
thinking that there's sort of one plot
and they're trying to read one of them
as probability density and that's not
what it is so we'll look at these again
alright so going back and just look at
them again now that we sort of talked
about what all of them are again we have
our sort of dot density probability
density plot our wave function plot and
our radial probability distribution ply
and for one s this is a you know we have
the dots closer to the nucleus here
probability goes up and goes down and
here this is really think you're
thinking about this is the amplitude of
finding an electron as you move away
from the nucleus so 1s is pretty simple
and I think these plots are a lot more
meaningful when we go on to look at
other orbitals so let's think about
those other orbitals and we'll finish
the other plots so this is just you can
actually stay on this pace so we're
going a lot of back-and-forth today so
here is your table that we had before
and here's 1s here's 2s here's 3s these
terms are in fact different as you can
see but
the angular term as we mentioned before
is still the same so that means 2s and
3's are still symmetrical so we're still
thinking about the probability of
finding an electron in some volume as
just going out as a distance of R so
let's look now at the three plots and
compare those plots and this is a the
one on your handout so we looked at I
showed you this and now we have all of
these three plots together here and in
the comparison of these three I think it
helps differentiate what you're seeing
in these plots so important point there
spiracle 1s 2s 3s they're all spherical
and here we see the dot density increase
and then the dot density goes to zero
and that's known as a node and so a node
is a value of R or theta or five for
which the wave function and wave
functions squared or the probability
density is zero and in this particular
case the type of node that we're seeing
is a radial node and so that's a value
of R for which the wave function wave
function squared probability density is
0 so it goes to 0 we have a node a
radial node then there's more
probability and then it increases and
then starts decreasing again and so if
you plot this with our with the radial
wave function versus R you see it go
down and it crosses the zero line here
and that's the node and that's at to a
zero and then it goes back up and this
plot often bothers people they're saying
what there's now negative probability no
these are not the probability diagrams
this is thinking about the amplitude of
finding an electron so we don't have to
worry it can have a positive or a
negative phase to it and if you look at
this plot the radial probability
distribution plot then you'll see that
actually the radius the most probable
radius is in this region over here and
you see that this is concentrated dots
up here so if we think about these two
which are really probability
distribution diagrams we're thinking
about the probability of finding an
electron you have a probability in here
close to the nucleus then you get a node
and then you have another probability
high probability of finding the electron
in fact that's the most probable radius
here for two s and then it decreases so
this line shows you what a radial node
looks like in all three plots in this
rate is this probability diagram wave
function squared plot it looks like
there's just an empty space no dots at
all down here it's where it crosses the
line and in the bottom plot it is where
you go up and down and again touches the
line before going back up so you should
be able to look at these plots and think
about what they mean for 3s we see the
same thing but now we have an intense
spot in the middle who are in the middle
near the nucleus that is indicated down
here there's probability of finding the
electron near the nucleus then there's a
node and that's in this plot where it
crosses the line and in this plot where
you have the empty space then you have
more probability of finding the electron
you have another bump here and then we
have another node indicated by touching
the zero line here touching here that's
at seven point 100 and then we have more
probability of finding the electron and
this is where the most probable radius
is at eleven point five so again you
need to be able to look at these
diagrams and recognize what constitutes
a radial node and a node is a place
where there is no probability that
you're going to find
to an electron so now let's think about
how many nodes or radial nodes you
should have when you have different
types of orbitals and this is just a
similar diagram to what I just showed
this is the wave function squared
probability diagram and now instead of
blue you have orange dots but otherwise
should be the same so four 1s four 2s
and 3s so for the 1s orbital we can
calculate how many radial nodes that we
should have by using this handy formula
and minus one minus L so four 1s we have
1 minus 1 and L is 0 so we have 0 radial
nodes and we can see that from that
diagram there are 0 radial nodes to us
now - and is 2 minus 1 mine is 0 so
that's 1 radial node and the radial node
again in this kind of diagram is the
empty space and that radial node is at
2a 0 4 3 s we have N equals 3 minus 1
minus L which is still 0 so we have two
radial nodes and so again the empty
space here and the at 1.9 a oh and then
at seven point one a OH so why don't you
give this a try now and tell me what
kind of radial nodes you would expect
for 4p
okay ten seconds these are pretty fast
yep so again we have to do n which is 4
minus 1 and then what is L in this case
1 so that gives you 2 all right so 4
minus 1 minus 1 or 2 radial nodes
all right don't put your clickers away
let's try something else so now tell me
which of these is correct both in terms
of the indicated number of radial nodes
and in terms of the plot for a 5 s
orbital
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
we're varying it up in terms of in terms
of the plots okay so maybe someone
someone want to say say what the right
answer is here
um so by the formula we just did you
know that has four radial nodes and if
you look at the graph of one there's
three and then there's another one at
the origin so that's four radial nodes
actually I just realized that I'm a
count here so this answer here we should
have four radial nodes that is correct
because we have n minus 1 minus L
actually this I think this is going to
this ant this should be going to this
answer just if we count one two three
sorry the new plot is like highly
confusing I have to count yeah so the
one at the origin should actually not
count doesn't this is not a node and so
this this is this so we have one two
three four
should be our four radial nodes that's a
nucleus and there isn't one there but
that doesn't count as a node so this
should be here I guess that's the pry
but thank you very much
and
you see here
where you were brave enough to answer
yeah there's a question yep
should there also be a certain number of
Peaks in the in the graph as well as
notes yeah so if you look at the peaks
these these are really hard to draw and
I think that's partly what the problem
is but when we look later in the handout
where they're drawn a little bit more
carefully you do have it does increase
so there are different numbers so we'll
have an we'll have nodes going down here
but then we'll have more distributions
but often the ones at the as you go long
it does indicate where the most probable
radius is as the taller ones and that
there it's you it's usually drawn at the
end so we have some plots and I'll point
this out later
okay we're gonna look at more plots
don't worry
so if anyone's good at drawing those let
me know cuz they're really hard to draw
so a lot of them are copied from the
book but then they don't copy very well
okay
so let's consider other kinds of nodes
and we're going to come back to radial
nodes all right so what about P orbitals
so here we have our table again these
are our P orbitals over here and and we
have our our n equals two cases here and
our l equals one so this these are x y&z
so our three P orbitals over here and
the important point is not to memorize
what these values are but now all of a
sudden we have dependence on angles so
we're going to have an angular component
to these and that means the probability
density as you go out from the nucleus
doesn't just depend on R anymore it
depends on theta and Phi which are sort
of the equivalent in sort of math what
in sort of a and to latitude and
longitude if you're thinking about
geography all right so let's see what
that looks like so that means then the P
orbitals are not spherically symmetrical
because it depends on angle so you just
don't go out and have have the
probability depend on the radius and
it's symmetrical in all the different
directions and here what some of them
look like these figures are in your
handouts here are some other figures so
the orbitals consists of two lobes so
you could view this as a lobe up here
and a lobe down here or you have these
lobes as these two different colors over
here and the lobes are separated by a
nodal plane and the nodal plane is a
plane on which the probability of
finding the electrons is
zero so in the top drawing the nodal
plane is drawn as a plane and in the
bottom bottom drawings you don't see a
plane you just see an empty space
between the lobes so empty space here
empty space here empty space there and
so if it helps you to kind of think
about an actual plane in between that's
good or you can just think that there's
a break between these notes and again
the nodal plane there's no probability
of finding an electron in the nodal
planes and the nodal planes are at the
nucleus therefore there is ZERO
probability of finding a P electron at
the nucleus s can get pretty close to
the nucleus but with a p orbital there's
a nodal plane there no no electrons are
going to be at the nucleus so now if
you're going out from the nucleus the
probability of an electron finding it
you could be going if you're going out
in this direction there's you know
you're not going to do very well if
you're going in this direction you
should do a lot better
so here the angular components really
matter that defines the shape of the
orbital and where you're going what
direction you're going in what angles
you're going in matters in terms of
whether you're going to find that
electron or not so another way to think
about this in this sort of these in
these nodal planes so here we'll just
define what plane it is so we have our
PZ orbital that's a nodal plane then in
x and y and so x and y are over here our
PX orbital is going to be in or the
nodal plane is going to be in Y Z plane
so over here and py will be an X Z plane
so again these nodal planes there's no
electron density there and this is arise
from these angular nodes in the wave
function so angular nodes then or are
these angular nodal planes our values of
theta and Phi for which the wave
function wave function squared
our zero so this is very difficult
different from the s case where we only
had radial nodes but now when in the
p-orbitals where the angular component
matters their angular nodes as well so
we can think about how to calculate the
angular nodes so total nodes is going to
be equal to n minus 1 the angular nodes
is L and as we saw before the radial
nodes are n minus 1 minus L all right so
let's have more practice in calculating
these and then we'll look at some more
diagrams so for 2's total nodes and you
can just yell this out total nodes will
be what 1 2 minus 1 or 1 angular nodes
are 0 for 1s there is none and if you
forget l equals 0 there radial nodes is
going to be right 2 minus 1 minus 0 or 1
all right let's try 3 PR sorry 2p is
next total nodes 1 again
so 2 minus 1 or 1 angular nodes 1 l
equals 1 here and radial nodes right 2
minus 1 minus 1 or 0 so since there's
only one total node if you figure it out
there was one angular node you can even
realize that there had to be 0 there
it's a way to check maybe your equations
alright so let's try 4 3 D now
how we're doing
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
okay
and let's just work that out over here
so total nodes for 3d we have three -
one or two angular nodes L equals to 4d
so radial nodes we have 3 - 1 - 2 or 0
all right so bring these handouts on
Wednesday because we need to go back and
look at more radial probability diagrams
and talk of more about nodes
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
okay
good job everyone all right I'm gonna
let's let's look through this a little
bit and you can sort of everyone can
help yell out some responses so this was
two s and that was the correct answer
which type of orbital is this 2p and if
you couldn't read this information here
you should have been able to read the
information about the nodes what kind
what equation is that four nodes yeah
and minus one minus l4 what kind of
nodes radial nodes right so if you know
what it means if l equals zero versus l
equals one and you knew this was L then
you could tell if it was an S orbital or
a p orbital and then whether it was 2 or
3 P is from the end so even if you
couldn't read this if you know knew that
expression then you were okay
what kind of orbital was in plot C this
was a 3 s l equals 0 and then this is a
what 3 p and l equals 2
louder D right so do 3 px 3 py and 3 pz
have different plots no they wouldn't
have they wouldn't have different plots
ok
so we'll continue to to look at this and
we're going to be starting with the
handout from last time and so let's
continue with Monday and continue with
these uh radial probability
distributions ok so this is again from
Monday page 6 we're talking about
orbital size and we've already looked at
this a little bit today so we should be
able to go through this now and a little
bit more detail you've already thought
about it so here we have the 2 s orbital
and we're going to have one node using
our equation that you just told me n
minus 1
- L and when we go from 2 s 2 2 P here
we have no radial nodes and we can look
at our MP which is the radius of map the
maximal probability of finding an
electron and you can note that when you
go from at from the 2 s to the 2 P the
radius actually decreases so the most
probable radius for 2 P is less than
that of 2s
now let's consider the 3 n equals 3 so
we have the 3 s situation over here and
so l equals 0 we have two nodes here and
now if you look at the radius the axis
over here you see that the most probable
for 2 s is you know close to 500 where
AO is the Bohr radius and over here
you're talking between 10 and 15 so we
see an increase in size going this way
and then when we go from 3 s 2 3 P so
here we have 3 minus 1 minus L which is
1 so we have one node down to 3 D 3
minus 1 minus 2 0 nodes and you see that
there is a decrease here in the most
probable radius so okay interesting
all right so 3 D has the smallest next 3
P next 3 s so there's two different
trends we're seeing 1 as we increase L
within the same n number and one going
from a smaller end value of n to a
larger value and then again within the
three within the end value as we change
L so again to say the same thing a
different way as n
increases from two to three the radius
most probable radius or the size
increases so from here to here we have
an increase in size and I just want to
make sure people have time to kind of
get all of this down should be good
I have a little picture that just shows
they're very different in size okay so
we'll go back to to this again and then
as I also said as L increases for a
given n so from L equals 0 to l equals 1
here then we have a decrease in the size
so you can see the most probable radius
moves over and then here is another
within N and N equals 3 we see again
this decrease so those are the two
trends that you observe when you look at
these radial probability distributions
so for example to draw distributions
like this you should be able to tell me
how many radial nodes you have for
different types of orbitals and you
should know these trends in size so I
think in the exam instructions it says
up to a 5 case you don't have to go on
forever to be able to draw them but you
should be able to look at these and tell
what kind of orbital it is and where the
nodes are be able to draw where the
nodes are one node here one two one node
here this kind of thing will be on the
exam next week all right
so there's something that's a little
counterintuitive when it comes to this
size issue and that has to do with how
this correlates to the amount of
shielding and as we see later to the
energy levels so only electrons in the S
state here really have any kind of
substantial
probability that they'll be close to the
nucleus so we have this little blip over
here that is close to the nucleus that
are at very small radii very small valve
use of our even though the most probable
is out here if we compare 3 s 2 3 P and
look at where the electrons are that are
closest to the nucleus they're quite a
bit farther away than in the 3s or
there's more probability that there's
going to be some closer here and then
the closest probability over here for
these electrons is quite a bit farther
away so we see these circles kind of
move out so even though the overall
radius the sort of size of the whole
thing is decreasing the probability that
they're going to be electrons really
close is actually going in the opposite
direction and so what this means is that
s electrons are the least shielded
because there's a higher probability
that there'll be some close to the
nucleus there's more penetration close
to the nucleus so s electrons are the
least shielded and we're going to come
back to this when we move on to today's
handout this is really important in
terms of thinking about the energy
levels and I'm going to have these
diagrams on the handout for today so
we'll see them again all right so before
we move to that handout we got to finish
our quantum numbers and talk about
electron spin so the fourth quantum
number describes the spin on the
electron and we already saw the magnetic
quantum number M we saw M sub L and now
we have M sub s and the S stands for
spin so there's some nomenclature that
actually makes sense
so there are two possible spin values
for an electron M s can equal plus 1/2
spin up or minus 1/2 spin down and here
are some little pictures of that so this
M s term this spin magnetic quantum
number completes the description of the
electron but it's not dependent on the
orbital to describe an orbital
completely you'll only need three
quantum numbers but to describe the
electron you need four and that is shown
again here on this picture so are on
this slide you need three quantum
numbers you need n L and M sub L to
describe the quantum number described
the orbital completely but you need a
fourth one this M sub s to describe the
electron so if you see wave function and
L M sub L you say that's telling me what
the orbital is and if we add the M sub s
then you look at that and said oh that's
gonna tell me all the way to the
electron what is going on so this final
quantum number led to what we know as
Pauli's exclusion principle which is
that no two electrons can have the same
four quantum numbers they can't have the
same no two electrons can have the same
spin in other words so if we are drawing
a configuration for neon with ten
electrons we're going to have with one
electron being up spin the next one is
going to be down because if we had two
of these both going up they would have
the same four quantum numbers and that's
not allowed by Pauli's exclusion
principle so when you have two here one
spin up one's been down in an orbital
then we say that those electrons are
paired and an important thing that kind
of comes out of all of this is that one
orbital can't hold more than two
electrons if it did there'd be another
electron that would have the same four
quantum numbers because you need three
quantum numbers to describe the electron
or the orbital we need three to describe
say that it's N equals one that it's and
then it's s state so we need those other
ones to describe the orbital and then
the fourth one to describe the spin so
if we add another
electron you'd have to that we're spin
up say and that just wouldn't work so
you cannot have more than two electrons
in the same orbital and this makes a lot
of sense when you think about why you
would be putting electrons in orbitals
that are higher energy why not just keep
putting them in the low energy orbital
and it's because you can't do that you
can't put more than two electrons in and
so therefore once you've filled a lower
energy orbital you gotta move up to the
next lowest energy orbital